# Seán Ó Riada

Use for Irish composer

Seán Ó Riada (1931-1971) was born in Cork and grew up in Bruff, Co. Limerick, where he learned to play the traditional fiddle. He studied music in University College Cork. He also learned to play piano and played it in both jazz and dance bands. He was assistant Director of music in Radio Éireann until he left for Paris in 1955. After a further study in Paris, where he became involved with Jazz and Greek musicians, he was appointed Musical Director of the Abby Theatre in Dublin in 1957 and also returned to work with Radio Eireann. O Riada first came to prominence in 1959 when he was commissioned by Gael Linn to write the Music for the movie ‘Mise Eire’. In 1963 O Riada took up a post lecturing in Music at University College, Cork, and he continued to work there until his death in 1971.

Throughout his life O Riada was a much renowned Irish Music Composer. But he also composed Classical music. He was also a very talented Bodhran player – giving this instrument a new lease of life in Irish Music. Ó Riada was quite critical of ceilì bands and he formed a “folk orchestra” called Ceoltoirì Chulann in 1960. He wanted to create a popular audience for traditional music and give it the dignity it deserved. He hoped that his new band could revolutionize the arrangement and performance of Irish Music. There imaginative arrangements involve interweaving melodies a classical-style harmonies.

The bodhrán had been seen as a primitive rhythm instrument but once O’Riada use it in Ceoltóirí Chualann is became a mainstream traditional Irish instrument in many groups. He also wanted to revive the 18th century Irish Harp music so he played the harpsichord in order to replicate the sound. Despite not giving many concerts they had a large following. Their last performance was recorded on the album “O’Riada sa Gaiety”. When the group broke up in 1969 many of them joined The Chieftains, whose style was greatly influenced by O’Riada.

The use of traditional airs such as “Róisín Dubh” and patriotic tunes like “A nation once again” in his orchestral scores made him a national celebrity. His soundtracks include; “Mise Éire” and “Saoirse” and also the film “The Playboy of the Western World”. He also wrote many liturgical works including “Ag Críost an Síol”. O’Riada also composed choral works, a symphony, and pieces for solo instruments and chamber groups. These include, Hill Field, Four Holderlin songs and Five Epigrams from the Greek Anthology.